Well, out of the Lincoln and out of other ones, Washington, the book I did on Washington, the book I did on Jefferson, because I was constantly getting the question, why don't we have great leaders like that anymore?
People remember the great leaders out of context, that they were great leaders in a society that was much worse than ours in all ways.
The politics was far dirtier.
There was nothing like the kind of vilification that George Washington and Thomas Jefferson underwent.
Do you think it's tame today?
Absolutely.
Oh, terribly.
Very tame.
Yeah, look at Chuck.
He was not only accused of adultery, but of adultery with a black slave who was more in his power than any office seeker or a governor.
And at a time when miscegenation and race mingling were considered horrors and abominations to much of the nation, he was called an atheist when that was an extremely damaging charge.
It was said that he had collaborated with the French terror.
John Quincy Adams was accused of being a pimp.
When he ran for president, circumstantial stories were published saying that he had procured women for Tsar Alexander when he was the ambassador to St.
Petersburg.
Washington was accused of plotting to return a kingship ruled by king to the government.
Which could be, you know, what charge could be worse to a man who ran the revolution that he's betraying his own revolution.
So Bill should lighten up a bit.
Sure.
But my point is that we don't recognize leadership in our midst because leaders are always criticized and they're bound to be because the follower does not simply defer to the leader as a superior being.
The followers are always engaged in a struggle with the leader.
People resist leadership, after all.
It's somebody else telling you what to do, and you don't want that.
And even if they are on the side of the leader in some respects, they often think the leader has been betraying them.
For instance, if you elect a leader for a certain cause, reduce the deficit, let's say.
Even if he gets a majority of people, you know, maybe 51% saying they want to reduce the deficit.
Some want to do it by shrinking government.
Some want to do it by raising taxes.
Some want to do it by changing entitlements.
And if you do it by this means, the people who voted for you, hoping you would do it by another means, feel betrayed and especially angry.
They can get more angry than the people who are your putative opponents.
For instance, look at Nixon.
It was the right wing, some of it, that was angrier at him than anybody on the left.
When everybody else was being kind of nice to Nixon, they called up people like Bill Rusher and Buchanan and others, who figured that wage and price controls and de-tom of Russia and opening to China and salt talks were tremendous betrayals at the very core of the conservative position.
So, leaders are always going to have criticism at the time.
It's only in retrospect that we look back and we say, oh, we had great leaders then.
You know, look at Dr. King.
I've heard a thousand times, I think, that in the interval between his death and now, when black leaders arrived, Jesse Jackson, we heard this constantly when Jesse Jackson was running for president.
Oh, for the good old days when we had a nice, respectable leader like Dr. King.
Well, when Dr. King was alive, of course, he was subject to vitriol and venom.
Yeah.
But people forget that.
And so now they just want to remember the good side of it.
And so with Lincoln, for instance, the man was called an ape and ignoramus and a betrayer also.
The abolitionists considered him a betrayer.
Nathaniel Parker had very bitter things to say about him.
That opening, pardon me, but that opening quote, which I guess you pulled out of the Library of America, where Lincoln is absolutely bailing out on the slave issue.
Yeah, in order to get elected, he had to repeat again and again that he was not for black voting, not for black social equality, not for marriage, not for any of those things, because he would never be elected unless he had made those pledges.
A leader always has to find what can actually get a following.
Hypocrisy is essential, isn't it?
Well, it's a hypocrisy.
It's certainly economizing on the truth.
Although, you know, I think he was sincere in saying he was not for those things because he knew they were not workable.
It's like saying, I'm not for a four-sided triangle.
He knew that it would be hard enough simply to check the spread of slavery in the 1850s.
And if he could do that, he was doing the maximum that was feasible.
So he said he's not for any of those things.
It's like saying, I'm not for going to the moon at that time.
You know, that was not going to arise.
Your decision to take this quality, which you have studied principally in political figures,
and to expand it into sports figures, entertainment figures, business figures.
Tell me a little bit about that, and to find the anti-types.
Well, I've always argued that moral leaders are the ones who are most important.
I wrote about that in my book, Confessions of a Conservative, Bearer Requires Under God, that Dr. King
Jane Addams, Anthony Benazep, the Quaker in Philadelphia, are the leaders who have changed our lives most, and that it's wrong to look simply to politics for leadership.
In fact, most resisted change in America, unions, abolition, civil rights, women's suffrage, didn't start in the electoral arena at all because no politician could touch it and survive.
It started with principled minorities led by
people who are not aspiring to office and will never reach it, but who change the society by their advocacy, by their protests, by their assertion of a right, even when it's not a right that can be immediately tinkered into law.
So I've always thought that and written a good deal about it.
And I've always thought that it was wrong to be looking simply to, well, for instance, I've written about Ralph Nader in the past, and I know friends of his or friends of mine who for years and years tried to get him to run for office.
I thought that was a terrible thing, because if he ran for office, he would have a constituency all of whose concerns would have to be addressed.
Things that he's not interested in, not particularly good at, he'd have to worry about servicing constituents' needs in areas
ranging all over the lot, whereas by focusing his activities on the causes that mattered to him, consumer causes mainly, in organizing his groups, he was able to be much more effective.
You don't have to hold office to be effective.
Dr. King held no office.
Jane Addams held no office.
Most of the early feminists held no office.
They couldn't.
They couldn't even vote.
Jeffrey Jackson is probably an example of one who probably shouldn't have run for office.
I think he did run for office thinking he would win.
You know, that was really wild.
Yeah, I think so.
I was following him pretty closely then.
That was wild.
I think running for office in order to get attention to your cause, the way
I'm trying to think now.
Well, William Buckley did in the Libertarian Party.
Chris Gorby's Al was kind of hard to figure out.
Yeah.
But you know— But you find it, don't you?
You find it with this full Howard Stern.
I mean, what the hell is he trying to do?
Yeah.
Very commoner.
That kind of one that's not really meant to win, but to give you another forum for voicing your opinion.
Is there something innate?
about the natural leader, or is it something that's really old?
Let me just interrupt.
When I was a naval officer many years ago, we used to say we had a number of captains on the ship.
They had this quality command presence.
I mean, the skipper would walk in a room, and everybody knew, without having to say a word.
It's just this kind of aura that kind of comes in with them, and they project it.
It's palpable.
I don't know what that means to comment.
On the other hand, I know people with that kind of radiant personality who have never put it to any use as a leader.
And I know people who don't have that, who nonetheless become leaders.
Nixon's a good example.
Nixon had none of the natural gifts you would expect of a leader.
He's not a good speaker, not good at meeting people, not good at most things that you think... Social greatness.
Right.
And yet he obviously had certain qualities that clicked with the...
potential followership of the time.
Put it in a different time, it wouldn't have worked, I don't think.
One of the things that made it feasible for him to rise was the tremendous sour mood of aggrieved resistance in the sixties when, you know, there was a, people wanted somebody who would be repressive.
The assassination of Robert Kennedy didn't hurt his, his.
Oh yeah, he was lucky too.
And in 72, the attempted assassination of Wallace.
You know, people say, why did he go to all this trouble to sabotage McGovern when McGovern was self-destructing?
Well, he didn't know until May of that year that Wallace was not going to be in the field.
And that was a tremendous threat to him.
Wallace had taken away 13.5% of the vote in 68, and that was from his people.
That was from the right.
And if he had run...
Well, that's arguable.
I mean, McGovern was never his opponent, I don't think.
I voted for him, as many of us in Massachusetts did.
But there was just an overkill on Nixon's part.
Tony Lucas and others think that the break-in was mainly to get stuff on Larry O'Brien.
I think that's another good case of that.
But it was an under-motivated, over-bungled operation, obviously.
It's amazing to see Gordon Liddy at the funeral.
How did he get a ticket, I wonder, of just throwing this out to see?
Yeah, well, Agnew's hard to turn down, after all.
Well, Agnew, he has.
He held the office.
There was a piece in the Times where he asked the family if he would be welcome or unwelcome, and they said he would be.
But it's hard to turn down a man who served in your administration in second place, and, uh, Lee.
I don't know why.
But there he was, up here in the gallery.
I'm trying to jump around like this.
The book does, of course, speak for itself, though.
I love these various categories, you know, charisma and bureaucracy there, these conflicting—again, let's talk about the development of this thesis here, this content.
Yeah, well, when I started— It is a culmination, apparently, pardon me, of other things that you've worked on.
Yeah, when I—I had talked about the—
Mark's favorite concept of charisma in my book on Kennedy and my book on Washington.
And I felt that there was more to be said about that, because I didn't go into the other things that he talks about, legitimate authority and bureaucratic authority.
But when I started choosing these people, I deliberately chose them, ones who would go with a theorist.
For instance, I think Machiavelli has
some of the most important things to be said about leadership.
And since he directs all his own comments, most of them at Cesare Borgia, I chose Borgia.
Since Weber chose King David as the type of charismatic leader, I chose him.
I love that, yeah.
Since Clausewitz chose Napoleon as his type of military leader, I did too, because that allows me to use Clausewitz very well.
Since Thorstein Vedlin used the sales as the type of the ultimate business leader, I used that.
I chose Perot because he's the inheritor of Patterson at National Cash Register and of Watson at IBM.
So in effect you get a kind of glimpse of this whole
history from the beginning of the century down to now of the development of this type.
You know, I could have chose Watson, Thomas Watson, but then that would have been only one step away from Patterson, whereas with Perot you see a guy who inherits this whole train of business.
It's very current, too.
Yes.
It does give you a—I mean, it does allow you to write for a general audience, I think, and I guess this is a question as well.
How do you avoid, and I believe you do it, how do you avoid a book like this from making it a pedantic kind of a book and to embrace them?
Well, that's the thing.
In most of my books, I try to begin with something concrete, you know, Nixon, and Nixon agonisties, and then go on to talk about the political system.
And so instead of writing a political science textbook, it helps to personalize it, I think.
My book, The Kennedy Imprisonment, was subtitled Meditation on Power, and it really was that.
But instead of writing an essay on power, I took the Kennedys, especially the old man, as a type of how power corrupts and tends to cripple itself by overreaching.
So the idea of taking these individuals and trying to pin it to them
It's interesting, a lot of the reviews have not even gone on to the theorists.
They've just talked about the individuals.
You know, maybe that's fair on my part, but I tried to use them.
Maybe it's also the fact that you only have 600-word slots in your review or whatever.
Yeah.
So, but it's true, it seems to me, that it's harder just to come to people and start talking about Machiavelli's theories of leadership.
than to tell a little story about Cesare Borgia and how Machiavelli observed him and formulated his own views by watching an actual man in operation.
Tell me a little bit about the selection of Madonna and— Yeah.
Actually, that came about partly by accident.
I asked my students—I took a survey of my students when I was teaching a course on leadership—
and who they considered leaders.
And four or five of them said, Madonna.
Shocking, isn't it?
And I said, well, what goal was she leading you to?
And they said, well, to lead a free and uninhibited life.
I said, was that really her aim?
It was essential then, by the way.
Oh, sure.
Absolutely.
Unless you're moving people toward a goal.
You're just having an influence.
You know, if I hear music, it has an influence on me.
Or if the weather's bad, it has an influence on me.
I look at somebody, and I'm disgusted, and turn it off for TV.
That's an influence.
It's moving to action.
Jim Jones is a leader, then, in Jonestown.
Sure.
Well, yeah, he is a leader.
There you get into— I'm sorry, we'll get back to Madonna in a bit.
Oh, yeah.
Why don't you follow up on that?
Yeah.
At a certain point, the Jim Jones, the Manson
kind of leader, gets his followers, obviously there's some leadership at the outset, but gets his followers into a state of reduced responsibility.
It's almost a mesmeric effect.
It's more like a hypnotist than a real leader, although it's a mixture, obviously.
So that by the end, they're doing, instead of seeking a goal together with the leader, they're just responding to stimuli, you know, as if they're Pavlov's dogs.
It was not their goal to go kill ourselves.
It was their goal to obey the leader no matter what.
But most leadership situations have to have the leader and the followers going toward a goal.
Now, if somebody disgusts me on television and I turn the television off, we're obviously not pursuing the same goal, even though I'm being influenced by him or her.
Anyway, with Madonna, they said that, and so I talked this through with them that
It was not her goal to have them wear clothes like her or something of that sort.
It's her goal to entertain them, to get money, to do various things.
Whereas Martha Graham, with whom, whose troupe she studied, by the way, Madonna, she started out as a dancer.
So there were these parallels with Martha Graham that Martha Graham didn't only, was not only an artist who performed well and gave satisfaction to her audience, to her fans.
An audience is not the same as a
following their passive, they receive aesthetic pleasure.
But she was deliberately creating a movement in favor of modern dance with a whole new art form, and trying to attract patrons and people who would not only come and watch her perform, but support that kind of dance in other areas, you know, all around her, and bringing into it artists like Noguchi
So to lead a cause is quite different from simply being an artist who performs well and gives satisfaction.
Is human nature a constant?
I mean obviously when you go through history and you do describe the qualities which, like Machiavelli and all these others, is human nature a constant through history?
No.
There are obviously some things that are continuous, but one of my points is that leadership in one era wouldn't work in another.
George Washington's kind of leadership wouldn't work today because his was a deferential society that mired a certain distance from him.
It was not egalitarian as it had become even by the time of Lincoln.
I give the example of Syrian holy men in the sixth century where people
went and took the advice and followed the leadership of Simeon Stylides, starving himself on a pillar, because they figured anybody who could be so ascetic was that close to God, and therefore would have all this wisdom.
I think that the mood of the sixties, a repressive mood that voted not only for Nixon but for George Wallace and Curtis LeMay and Spiro Agnew, was
a time that was exploitable by Nixon's kind of leadership.
At another time, it wouldn't have worked at all.
You know, given a different period, I don't think Nixon would have been able to be a leader of the scale that he was then.
So one of my arguments is that there's not one secret of leadership, one technique, one device, even in these various types.
That's why Napoleon, for instance,
He'd be very successful in the early part of his career, and not at the end.
He hadn't changed, really, but the situation had, and he hadn't adapted his tactics to the situation.
The kinds of warfare he waged when he was in charge of his army personally couldn't be waged when he was an emperor disposing of dozens of armies all over Europe.
So you shouldn't look just at the leader.
He's only one factor in the equations.
It's the followers also, and the goal that's proposed at the time.
And unless you get those three working together, you don't have leadership.
And no matter what the internal qualities of the leader, if the followers aren't there, and the goal is not the kind that the followers can't aspire to, leadership won't occur.
If you don't mind just commenting on the Gettysburg book.
read to me almost as an inspired book.
The idea to take these 272 words and just really examine how 272 words could have, I have to say, almost an inspired book, and talk a little bit about how that fits into the general
corpus of Gary Will's... Well, I've always been intrigued by the idea that to understand a text from the past, you have to reconstruct the society around it, because the words all have a different weight and import.
So I wrote a whole book on the Declaration of Independence, Inventing America.
That was the one text, and I tried to reconstruct the society around it.
This actually started in graduate school when I took a course from Bernard Knox on Euripides, and we spent the whole term on the Medea, the one play.
He's wonderful.
Yeah.
Well, because that's so distant from us in time, it's necessary to recreate the whole attitude toward women, toward aliens,
you know two barbarians she's a caucus she's a queen from caucus uh princess uh so unpacking the text uh reassembling the social atmosphere in which the text uh was originally performed uh is something that is a big assignment for a text like that well that's true even for something as it's only
as distant from us as the middle of the 19th century.
So my argument was that people's, the electric charge of different words because of transcendentalism, because of the rural cemetery movement, because of the arguments over the meaning of the people ruled by the people, was such that
in order to get at the original text as experienced by the original audience, you have to rebuild their world around that text.
And I would love to do that with other texts, but it's hard to find.
You know, I've done it with the Declaration of Independence and with the Federalist Papers and now with the Guesberg Address.
I can't think of another American sacred document to do it with.
Imagine if this had been
videotaped or something.
It's amazing that it had such a profound effect, impact when it was delivered once.
I mean, it was the radio, or was it the dissemination of a printed text?
Yeah, it was a short text, so it could be printed, reprinted easily and often, and accurately.
That's essential, too, isn't it?
Sure, and accurately.
See, Everett was very much worried with good cause that his text wouldn't be
was not very accurate.
For instance, the transcriptions of the Lincoln-Douglas debate are notoriously inaccurate because of the problems of transcribing them, but also because the two papers that they were reported in were blatantly biased and distorts attacks, one in favor of Lincoln and one in favor of Douglas.
So the event took greater significance than what they had to say.
Yeah.
But with the Gatsberger drafts, it was easy to have an accurate copy.
So people actually, they didn't really read what happened.
And he probably furnished a copy.
Oh, he did.
We have five handwritten copies because he gave them to people to be celebrated.
And also, it was connected, that cemetery was itself a big thing.
You know, the states put it together, and it was a new idea that the bodies would not go back to the family graveyard.
And Massachusetts was especially resistant to the idea, because, you know, there's a lot of family pride in these people, and they wanted to come home and lie in the family plot.
So to have the idea that you're going to have a common grave at a time of states' rights, you know, the idea of a national body.
So the occasion, clearly, it was much more, far more significant than we probably appreciate today.
Yes.
The occasion, it would have been a very big deal, even aside from the Gettysburg Address.
And it continued to be.
You know, the states all had to send their delegates to make the choice of the monument.
And so it continued to be in the news, as it were, for years afterward.
And then we kept to remember that Lincoln was shot only a little more than a year later, so that it became, along with the second inaugural, the last—see, I was often asked when I went around talking about that book, did Lincoln know what he had really accomplished with this?
And I would say no, because he knew it was very good.
He'd done his job, and it would have a big impact.
But of course, he thought he was going to write a lot more speeches, and that they were going to be also very good, because he was becoming better and better all the time.
He was growing as a writer and thinker and inspired leader.
So he knew there were big tasks ahead all through Reconstruction and that kind of thing, and he would have to write.
He'd have to top himself, or try to.
But of course, all that was taken away when he was killed.
So all we had was a kind of lapidary summary statement of his position in this one short address.
And it took on an importance it wouldn't have had otherwise.
And now to go back to the typical leadership book, is this a culmination of all the earlier
Well, they'd certainly feed into it.
I don't know if it's a combination, because again, like Lincoln, I want to go out and write other things, and we'll take some of these ideas farther.
But in a way, it's a departure.
I've been writing mainly about American culture, and this looks at some other things, too, aside from American culture.
I suppose that some of the people I treat I might want to do more about, maybe something on Harriet Tubman.
So nothing, no statement is final until you're dead.
How do you, you mentioned Harriet Tubman.
You primarily work with primary sources, I gather.
You don't go in with any kind of notion about how you're
How does things set up?
No, with her, the sources are so exiguous— That's a great word.
That you have to— How do you spell that word?
You have to mine them pretty heavily, because unfortunately, you know, she couldn't write, so she left no documents herself.
Her work was secret, so people didn't publicize it at the time.
After the war, people tended to forget about her.
You know, it's terrible that she died in the 20th century.
And she could have been tape-recorded.
We could hear her voice.
We could hear her songs that she used as signals to the slaves.
We could have heard Frederick Douglass could have been taped, and no man wasn't.
These are tremendous historical losses.
So with her, you have to look at what you have and discount some of the later things.
For instance, some of the stuff written about her was written
the war to get her a pension.
And people exaggerated her services to the Union Army in order to try to get her a pension.
And you can, you know, there are ways you can show that they were exaggerating.
And they exaggerated the number of her missions and that kind of thing.
And you don't have to do that.
They were heroic enough.
So, and I was surprised by certain things about her.
For instance, we tend to think of her, or I guess maybe just I did, as
deeply religious than she was, and maybe approximating Dr. King and being nonviolent.
She wasn't a doll.
She was violent.
She went to rescue these people, and if anybody tried to stop her, she would shoot them.
She'd carry a gun for that purpose.
And if her members of her party tried to chicken out, she would force them to go ahead.
She said before they took off, if you're coming with me, you're coming all the way.
There's no turning around.
And when somebody got frightened and tried to turn around, she pulled a gun out and said, I'm going home.
She said, you can't go home, you're dead.
It's a fascinating, yeah.
So where would you start?
I mean, how would you begin to build a life of, say, you have her interviews with Sarah Bradford.
And some of that can't be checked.
uh but some can for instance the story of the troy rescue in troy new york there are two newspaper accounts of that and so you there you have an independent uh way of checking the narrative and seeing that sarah bradford's pretty trustworthy there and uh and there was a lawyer who gave up who wrote a letter about it uh so there you have uh four sources for that story so that's the most uh
accurate and uh authenticated story and from that you can extrapolate what she must have acted like because here we see her in action we see her improvising uh she she rescued this guy and then he's recaptured and she has to go and uh rescue him again and she's thinking on her feet and the poor guy faints and she picks him up and carries him you know she was very short but she was tough because she'd worked in the field
And so she carried him downstairs and put him in a cart.
And the cart gets away and she gets away.
By the way, what's our... I'm supposed to be down there in ten minutes.
We can walk as we go down.
I wonder if you could inscribe... Yeah, let me go.